>> Woodruff: WALL STREET'S
GROWING RAP SHEET.
BIG BANKS PLEAD GUILTY TO
RIGGING CURRENCY RATES, PAYING
BILLIONS IN FINES.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY:
OSAMA BIN LADEN'S BOOKSHELF
DECLASSIFIED.
A GLIMPSE INTO THE AL-QAEDA
NETWORK, THROUGH ITS LEADER'S
DOCUMENTS, BOOKS AND LETTERS.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, ADVANCES IN
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE THAT
COULD MAKE YOUR JOB OBSOLETE.
ROBOTS THAT CAN THINK FASTER
AND SMARTER THAN HUMANS.
>> GOING FORWARD WE MAY SEE
AUTOMATION UNFOLD IN A TOP HEAVY
PATTERN WHERE A LOT OF THE BEST
JOBS ARE THE ONES TO BE
IMPACTED.
>> ANY KIND OF WHITE COLLAR JOB
SITTING AT A COMPUTER AT A DESK,
THOSE ARE GOING TO BE VERY
SESUPPORTIBLE TO THIS.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THE CRISIS OF MIGRANTS
STRANDED AT SEA IN SOUTHEAST
ASIA TOOK A DRAMATIC TURN TODAY.
INDONESIA AND MALAYSIA AGREED
TO ACCEPT THOUSANDS OF THE
REFUGEES.
MANY,IKE LMORE THAN 400
RESCUED TODAY, ARE ROHINGYA
MUSLIMS FLEEING PERSECUTION IN
MYANMAR AND BANGLADESH.
MALAYSIA'S FOREIGN MINISTER
ANNOUNCED THEY WILL NO LONGER
BE DENIED ENTRY.
>> INDONESIAN AND MALAYSIA
AGREED TO CONTINUE TO PROVIDE
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO THOSE
7,000 IRREGULAR MIGRANTS STILL
AT SEA.
WE ALSO AGREED TO OFFER THEM
TEMPORARY SHELTER PROVIDED THAT
THE RESETTLEMENT AND
REPATRIATION PROCESS WILL BE
DONE IN ONE YEAR BY THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY.
>> Ifill: IN WASHINGTON, THE
STATE DEPARTMENT SAID THE
UNITED STATES IS WILLING TO TAKE
MORE OF THE REFUGEES, AND HELP
OTHER GOVERNMENTS WITH THEIR OWN
RESETTLEMENT EFFORTS.
>> Woodruff: ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS SEIZED AN ANCIENT CITY
IN CENTRAL SYRIA TODAY, RAINGSI
FEARS THEY'LL DESTROY ROMAN
RUINS.
THE TARGET WAS PALMYRA, WHICH IS
FAMED FOR ITS 2,000-YEAR-OLD
TEMPLE, THEATER AND COLONNADES.
MEANWHILE, IN IRAQ, GOVERNMENT
TROOPS SAID THEY FOUGHT OFF AN
ATTACK NEAR RAMADI, AS ISIS
TRIES TO CONSOLIDATE GAINS
THERE.
>> Ifill: IRAN'S SUPREME LEADER
HAS LAID DOWN A NEW RED LINE IN
NUCLEAR TALKS WITH WORLD POWERS.
AYATOLLAH KHAMENEI SPOKE AT A
MILITARY ACADEMY TODAY, AND
INSISTED INSPECTORS WILL NEVER
INTERVIEW IRAN'S NUCLEAR
SCIENTISTS.
SCIENTISTS. >> (
translated): NO WISE
>> (translated): NO
WISE PERSON IN THE WORLD WOULD
ALLOW
PERSON IN THE WORLD WOULD ALLOW
THAT.
THEY HIDE THEIR SCIENTISTS AND
EVEN KEEP THEIR NAMES
CONFIDENTIAL.
THE RUDE AND SHAMELESS ENEMY
EXPECTS US TO MAKE THE WAY OPEN
FOR THEM TO COME HERE AND TALK
AND NEGOTIATE WITH OUR
SCIENTISTS, SUCH PERMISSION
WILL, UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES, BE
GIVEN.
>> Ifill: KHAMENEI ALSO REJECTED
GIVING INSPECTORS ACCESS TO
MILITARY SITES.
THE NUCLEAR TALKS ARE UNDER WAY
IN VIENNA, WITH A DEADLINE
OF JUNE 30.
>> Woodruff: IN ANOTHER
DEVELOPMENT, IRAN MOVED TO AVERT
A CONFRONTATION AT SEA, WITH
SAUDI ARABIA.
THE TEHRAN GOVERNMENT SAID IT
WILL NOT TRY TO SEND A SHIPLOAD
OF HUMANITARIAN AID DIRECTLY TO
YEMEN, UNDER MILITARY ESCORT.
INSTEAD, THE SHIP WILL GO TO
DJIBOUTI, FOR A U.N. INSPECTION.
FROM THERE, IT WOULD SAIL TO A
YEMENI PORT CONTROLLED BY SHIITE
REBELS.
THE SAUDIS HAVE WARNED AGAINST
ANY EFFORT TO SEND ARMS TO THE
REBELS.
>> Ifill: AN ESTIMATED SIX
MILLION GERMANS FACED TOUGH
COMMUTES TODAY, AFTER DRIVERS OF
PASSENGER TRAINS WALKED OFF THE
JOB.
AT STATIONS AROUND THE COUNTRY,
SIGNS AND DISPLAYS ALERTED
TRAVELERS TO THE STRIKE, WHILE
DRIVERS DEMONSTRATED FOR HIGHER
WAGES OUTSIDE.
IT'S THE NINTH SUCH WALKOUT IN
10 MONTHS.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, THE NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY WILL HAVE TO CURTAIL ITS
BULK COLLECTION OF PHONE
RECORDS, STARTING FRIDAY.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT ISSUED
THAT WARNING TODAY, WITH PARTS
OF THE PATRIOT ACT SET TO EXPIRE
JUNE 1.
IT CAME AS KENTUCKY SENATOR RAND
PAUL, A REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE, TIED UP THE SENATE,
SPEAKING AGAINST THE PATRIOT
ACT.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA
IS CALLING CLIMATE CHANGE A
THREAT TO THE NATION'S ABILITY
TO DEFEND ITSELF.
HE ADDRESSED GRADUATES AT
THE U.S. COAST GUARD ACADEMY IN
NEW LONDON, CONNECTICUT.
AND, HE CITED EVERYTHING FROM
CROP LOSSES THAT FEED CONFLICT,
TO RISING SEA LEVELS THAT SWAMP
NAVAL BASES.
>> I'M HERE TODAY TO SAY THAT
CLIMATE CHANGE CONSTITUTES A
SERIOUS THREAT TO GLOBAL
SECURITY, AN IMMEDIATE RISK TO
OUR NATIONAL SECURITY AND MAKE
NO MISTAKE, IT WILL IMPACT HOW
OUR MILITARY DEFENDS OUR
COUNTRY.
SO WE NEED TO ACT, AND WE NEED
TO ACT NOW.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT SAID
THOSE WHO DENY A HUMAN ROLE IN
CLIMATE CHANGE ARE PLACING THE
COUNTRY AT RISK.
>> Woodruff: THE STATE OF
NEBRASKA IS ON ITS WAY TO
ABOLISHING THE DEATH PENALTY,
AFTER LAWMAKERS
VOTED TO REPEAL IT TODAY.
IN A NEW TWIST, CONSERVATIVES
SUPPORTED THE MEASURE, CITING
THE COSTS OF INJECTION DRUGS AND
LEGAL APPEALS.
MARYLAND, IN 2013, WAS THE LAST
STATE TO END CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
>> Ifill: A CRACKDOWN ON
PRESCRIPTION DRUG ABUSE SWEPT
ACROSS THE DEEP SOUTH TODAY.
AGENTS FROM THE DRUG ENFORCEMENT
ADMINISTRATION RAIDED CLINICS,
PHARMACIES AND OTHER SITES IN
ARKANSAS, ALABAMA, LOUISIANA
AND MISSISSIPPI.
IT'S PART OF A NEARLY YEAR-LONG
OPERATION.
>> Woodruff: AND ON WALL STREET,
STOCKS STRUGGLED TO MAKE ANY
HEADWAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 27 POINTS TO CLOSE BACK
BELOW 18,300.
THE NASDAQ GAINED LESS THAN TWO,
AND THE S&P 500 SLIPPED TWO.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
BIG BANKS PLEAD GUILTY FOR
RIGGING CURRENCY RATES
WORLDWIDE.
A RARE WINDOW INTO OSAMA BIN
LADEN'S PERSONAL LIFE AND THE
AL-QAEDA NETWORK.
SCIENTISTS LINK THE DEEPWATER
HORIZON OIL SPILL TO DOLPHIN
DEATHS IN THE GULF.
WINNERS AND LOSERS AS MORE
ROBOTS TAKE OVER JOBS.
IS THERE A PATH TO RECOVERY FOR
STRUGGLING BLACK COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES?
AND, FEMALE SPIRITUAL GUIDES IN
MOROCCO WORKING TO EMPOWER WOMEN
AND STOP VIOLENT EXTREMISM.
>> Woodruff: BIG BANKS AND THEIR
BEHAVIOR ARE AGAIN AT THE HEART
OF A NEW CRIMINAL CASE BROUGHT
BY THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND
OTHER AUTHORITIES TODAY.
FIVE MAJOR INSTITUTIONS PLED
GUILTY TO RIGGING CURRENCIES
AND MANIPULATING THE FOREIGN
EXCHANGE MARKET.
THE BANKS ALSO AGREED TO PAY
MORE THAN $5 BILLION COMBINED IN
NEW PENALTIES.
THE FINES WERE SOME OF THE
BIGGEST BROUGHT TO DATE BY THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
THE BANKS WERE ACCUSED OF
MANIPULATING THE WORLD'S LARGEST
AND LEAST-REGULATED TRADING
MARKET WHERE TRILLIONS OF
DOLLARS CHANGE HANDS.
AMONG THOSE PLEADING GUILTY:
J.P. MORGAN CHASE, CITIGROUP,
BARCLAYS, THE ROYAL BANK OF
SCOTLAND AND U.B.S.
AT A PRESS CONFERENCE IN
WASHINGTON, ATTORNEY GENERAL
LORETTA LYNCH SPELLED OUT HOW
THE RIGGING WORKED.
>> STARTING AS EARLY AS 2007,
CURRENCY TRADERS AT SEVERAL
MULTINATIONAL BANKS FORMED A
GROUP THAT THEY DUBBED THE
CARTEL.
IT'S PERHAPS FITTING THAT THEY
CHOSE THAT NAME, AS IT APTLY
DESCRIBES THE BRAZENLY ILLEGAL
BEHAVIOR THAT THEY WERE ENGAGED
IN ON A NEAR FIVE- YEAR BASIS.
ALMOST EVERYDAY, FOR MORE THAN
FIVE YEARS, TRADERS IN THIS
CARTEL USED A PRIVATE ELECTRONIC
CHAT ROOM TO MANIPULATE THE SPOT
MARKET'S EXCHANGE RATE BETWEEN
EUROS AND DOLLARS, USING CODED
LANGUAGE TO CONCEAL THEIR
COLLUSION.
>> Woodruff: LET'S LEARN MORE
ABOUT HOW THIS WORKED AND
PUNISHMENT THAT IS AND IS NOT
BEING HANDED DOWN.
KERI GEIGER IS COVERING THE
STORYFOR BLOOMBERG NEWS
AND JOINS ME NOW.
WELCOME AGAIN TO THE NEWSHOUR.
YOU WERE SAYING THIS IS AN
HISTORIC FIRST WHAT HAPPENED
TODAY.
HOW SO?
>> WELL, IT'S REALLY IS A
FASCINATING CASE.
I MEAN, TO PUT IT INTO
PERSPECTIVE, ONE YEAR AGO WE HAD
NO BANKS ON WITH THE THAT HAD
EVER PLEADED GUILTY TO CRIMINAL
CHARGES.
AND TODAY, WE HAVE EIGHT BANKS
IN TOTAL.
WE'VE HAD TWO BANKS LAST YEAR,
DEUTSCHE BANK EARLIER THIS YEAR,
AND TODAY SPECIFICALLY WE HAVE
FIVE MORE BANKS.
SO IT REALLY SHOWS A SHIFT IN
HOW THE DUF DEPARTMENT OF JFS IS
DOING ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS AND
POLICING WITH THE.
THEY'RE TAKING MUCH HARSHER
PENALTIES FOR CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
THAT MAYBE A YEAR OR TWO AGO MAY
NOT HAVE WARRANTED A GUILTY
PLEA.
>> Woodruff: TELL US MORE
ABOUT WHAT IS GOING ON.
WE HEARD A LITTLE BIT OF IT FROM
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND HOW
THEY CALLED THEMSELVES "THE
CARTEL."
HOW DOES THIS WORK?
>> SO YOU HAVE A HAND FULL OF
TRADERS AT EACH OF THESE FIVE
BANKS, AS LORETTA LYNCH SAID,
PARTICIPATE IN THESE CHAT ROOMS.
AND BASICALLY, WHAT THEY DO IS
COORDINATE REALLY LARGE,
MULTI-MILLION-DOLLAR CURRENCY
EXCHANGE ORDERS FOR THEIR CLIENT
ON WHEN THEY'RE GOING TO EXECUTE
THOSE ORDERS.
ALL AT THE SAME TIME THEY'RE
GOING TO 53 AND SELL LARGE
ORDERS OF THE SAME AMOUNTS OF
CIRNS, AND WHAT THAT DID WAS
DROVE THE PRICE OF THE CURRENCY
EITHER UP OR DOWN RIGHT BEFORE
THE END OF THE CLOSING DAY.
SO THEY WERE ACTUALLY ABLE TO
MANIPULATE THE CURRENCY MARKETS.
THIS IS ACTUALLY AN ANTITRUST
CASE.
SO THESE BANKS OF GUILTY OF
COLLUDING TO MANIPULATE THE
FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET, AND
IT'S VERY RARE THAT YOU SEE A
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION THAT
ACTUALLY HAS TO PLEAD GUILTY TO
ANY CHARGES, MUCH LESS AN
ANTITRUST CHARGE.
>> Woodruff: SO IT SOUNDS FAZ
THERE'S NO QUESTION THE PEOPLE
INVOLVED KNEW WHAT THEY WERE
DOING WAS WRONG, WAS ILLEGAL.
WHAT ABOUT HIGHER-UPS, KERI
GEIGER?
DID THEY KNOW WHAT WAS GOING ON?
AND IF THEY DIDN'T, WHY NOT?
>> WELL, I MEAN, THIS CALLS INTO
THE QUESTION OF BASICALLY HOW
BANKS COMPLIANCE WORKS.
THESE WALL STREET BANKS ARE
HUGE, GIANT OPERATIONS, AND IT
LOOKS LIKE THAT THE SENIOR
EXECUTIVE AT THESE BANK ADDITION
NOT KNOW THIS ACTIVITY WAS GOING
ON.
I'M SURE IF THEY DID IT WOULD
HAVE BEEN STOPPED BECAUSE THEY,
OBVIOUSLY, DON'T WANT ILLEGAL
ACTIVITY HAPPENING AT THEIR
BANKS.
BUT LARGER PROBLEM IS IT'S
BECOME VIRTUALLY IMPOSSIBLE, AS
WE'VE SEEN OVER THE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS WITH ALL THESE
ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS AGAINST WALL
STREET, TO POLICE EVERY
INDIVIDUAL THAT'S WORKING IN
THESE BANKS.
AND SO YOU HAVE THE RESULT OF
TODAY WHERE YOU HAVE FIVE BANKS
PLEADING GUILTY TO VERY SERIOUS
CRIMINAL CHARGES, YOU KNOW,
WITHOUT THE KNOWLEDGE OF
SENIOR-- YOU KNOW, SENIOR
EXECUTIVES DON'T HAVE THE
KNOWLEDGE THAT THIS IS GOING ON.
>> Woodruff: BUT THEY KNEW BIG
MONEY WAS BEING MADE IN THESE
DEPARTMENTS, IN THESE DIVISIONS.
>> RIGHT.
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO TELL HOW
MUCH THE BANKS ACTUALLY PROFITED
OFF THESE TRADES.
IT LOOKS LIKE THESE TRADES WERE
BASICALLY DONE FOR THE
INDIVIDUAL TRADER'S BENEFIT AS
OPPOSED TO LARGER PROFITS FOR
THE BANKS.
>> Woodruff: KERI GEIGER, WHY
NO INDIVIDUAL CHARGED?
WE KNOW THERE ARE SOME NAMES
NAMED IN WHAT THE GOVERNMENT
SAID TODAY, BUT THIS IS A FINE
ON THE INSTITUTION.
WHY AREN'T THEY GOING AFTER THE
INDIVIDUALS INVOLVED?
>> WE FULLY EXPECT THAT THERE
WILL BE CHARGES AGAINST THE
INDIVIDUALS.
THOSE CASE TAKE A LITTLE BIT
LONG TORE DEVELOP.
THEY REQUIRE COOPERATION FROM
BOTH THE BANKS, AS WELL AS
INDIVIDUALS INVOLVED IN THIS.
SO WE ABSOLUTELY DO EXPECT THE
DEPARTMENT OF JFS TO COME DOWN
WITH INDIVIDUAL CHARGES IN THIS
CASE.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT ABOUT
PENALTIES?
OVER $5 BILLION.
YOU ADD THAT TO WHAT THEY WERE
FIND, I GUESS LAST NOVEMBER.
IT'S ABOUT $9 BILLION ALL
TOGETHER.
HOW MUCH OF A HIT IS THAT ON THE
ACCOUNTS OF THESE BANKS.
>> SURPRISINGLY, WHILE THE
NUMBERS ARE VERY BIG AND THE
BANKS OBVIOUSLY DON'T WANT TO BE
SHELLING OUT THIS MUCH MONEY FOR
FINES, THEY ARE VERY SMALL.
THEY HAVE BEEN PROVISIONED,
QUARTER AFTER QUARTER, BASICALLY
WHAT THE BANKS DO IS THEY SET
ASIDE THIS MONEY EACH QUARTER
WITH THE EXPECTATIONS THAT
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO PAY IT
OUT.
THEY'VE BEEN UNDER INVESTIGATION
FAIR LONG TIME.
SO THEY'VE BEEN PREPARING FOR
THESE FINES FOR A LONG TIME.
AND IT DOESN'T REALLY HURT THE
BOTTOM LINES.
AND TYPICALLY ON THE DAYS TH
AND WE'VE SEEN THIS WITH OTHER
SETTLEMENTS ON OTHER BANKS-- THE
SHARE PRICE GOES UP OR STAY
FLAT.
IT TYPICALLY DOESN'T HURT THE
SHARE PRICES EITHER.
SO IT'S DIFFICULT TO TELL IF
THESE LARGE FINES COUPLED WITH
GUILTY PLEAS ACTUALLY DO DETER
BAD BEHAVIOR AT THESE BANKS,
EVEN THOUGH THEY'RE NECESSARY TO
PROSECUTE FOR THESE CRIMES.
>> Woodruff: IT CERTAINLY DOES
RAISE THAT QUESTION.
KERI GEIGER WITH BLOOMBERG NEWS,
WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: TODAY, WE FOUND OUT A
BIT MORE ABOUT AL QAEDA LEADER
OSAMA BIN LADEN,INCLUDING WHAT
HE WROTE, WHAT HE LOOKED FOR IN
RECRUITS AND WHAT WAS ON HIS
BOOKSHELF.
THE INFORMATION WAS REVEALED IN
A STACK OF DOCUMENTS RELEASED
THIS MORNING BY THE DIRECTOR OF
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE.
OSAMA BIN LADEN REMAINED FIXED
ON ATTACKING THE UNITED STATES
UNTIL HIS DEATH, AND HE URGED
AL-QAEDA'S AFFILIATES TO PUT
ASIDE RIVALRIES, IN SERVICE OF
THE LARGER FIGHT.
THOSE INSIGHTS CAN BE GLEANED
FROM THE MATERIAL MADE PUBLIC
TODAY, AS MANDATED BY CONGRESS.
THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE SAYS IT WAS SEIZED
AFTER THE TERROR LEADER WAS SHOT
DEAD BY NAVY SEALS ON MAY 2,
2011.
WITHIN THE TROVE, A LIST OF WHAT
THE SEALS FOUND ON WHAT THEY
CALLED BIN LADEN'S BOOKSHELF,
INCLUDING: "IMPERIAL HUBRIS,"
AUTHORED BY THE C.I.A. OFFICER
WHO HEADED THE SEARCH FOR BIN
LADEN, AND "OBAMA'S WARS" BY BOB
WOODWARD.
THE RELEASE FOLLOWS A RECENT
ARTICLE PUBLISHED IN THE "LONDON
REVIEW OF BOOKS" BY LONG-TIME
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER SEYMOUR
HERSH.
>> Ifill: HERSH SAYS THAT,
CONTRARY TO THE OFFICIAL U.S.
ACCOUNT, PAKISTAN KNEW ABOUT AND
KEPT BIN LADEN IN THE GARRISON
TOWN OF ABBOTTABAD, THAT THE
U.S. COORDINATED THE RAID ON HIS
COMPOUND WITH PAKISTAN, AND
THAT, IN FACT, VERY LITTLE
USEFUL INTELLIGENCE WAS SEIZED.
THE WHITE HOUSE HAS FLATLY
DENIED THOSE CLAIMS.
>> THE STORY IS RIDDLED WITH
INACCURACIES AND OUTRIGHT
FALSEHOODS.
THE FORMER DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF
THE C.I.A., MIKE MORELL, HAS
SAID THAT EVERY SENTENCE WAS
WRONG.
>> Ifill: IN ALL, OFFICIALS MADE
103 BIN LADEN PAPERS AND VIDEOS
PUBLIC TODAY.
THEY SAID THE TIMING WAS NOT
CONNECTED TO THE HERSH STORY.
ONE HAND-WRITTEN LETTER, A
MISSIVE TO ONE OF HIS WIVES,
TRANSLATED BY THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT, IS TITLED "MY WILL,"
AND SAYS: "IF I GET KILLED, AND
YOU WANT TO RETURN TO YOUR
FAMILY, THEN THAT IS OKAY, BUT
YOU HAVE TO RAISE MY CHILDREN
PROPERLY."
ANOTHER LETTER TURNS OUT TO BE A
JOB APPLICATION TO JOIN AL
QAEDA.
WOULD-BE JIHADIS ARE INSTRUCTED
TO "WRITE CLEARLY AND LEGIBLY."
AND THEY ARE ASKED: "WHO SHOULD
WE CONTACT IN CASE YOU BECOME A
MARTYR?"
FOR MORE ON WHAT WAS CONTAINED
IN THE BIN LADEN DOCUMENTS, WE
TURN TO, BRIAN FISHMAN A
RESEARCH FELLOW AT BOTH THE NEW
AMERICA FOUNDATION AND THE
COMBATING TERRORISM CENTER AT
WEST POINT.
AND, GREG MILLER, WHO COVERS
NATIONAL SECURITY MATTERS FOR
THE WASHINGTON POST.
GREG MILLER, YOU SPENT THE DAY
PORING THROUGH ALL OF THESE
DOCUMENTS.
WHAT DID YOU SEE, AFTER HAVING
COVERED THIS ISSUE FOR SO LONG,
THAT SURPRISED AND ENLIGHTENED
YOU?
>> ACTUALLY, THERE WAS ONE
DOCUMENT IN THERE THAT REALLY
JUMPED OUT AT ME AND IT WAS SORT
OF SOMETHING I STUMBLED THROUGH
READING THROUGH.
IT'S A DOCUMENT-- IT'S A LETTER,
BASICALLY, BIN LADEN SENDS TO
ONE OF HIS WIVES WHO HAD BEEN
HIDING IN IRAN.
IN IT, HE IS MAKING PLANS OR
TRYING TO MAKE ARRANGEMENTS FOR
HIM TO JOIN HIM IN PAKISTAN, AND
HE REVEALS THAT THE ISOLATION
THERE HAS GOTTEN SO BAD AND THE
SECURITY WORRIES SO BAD THAT HE
HAD THOUGHT ABOUT MOVING,
THOUGHT ABOUT LEAVING THAT
COMPOUND, AND THIS WAS JUST
MONTHS BEFORE THAT U.S. RAID.
AND IT JUST SORT OF SHOWS, YOU
KNOW, IF THAT-- IF HE HAD
FOLLOWED THROUGH ON THAT-- AND
IT'S NOT CLEAR THAT HE HAD TAKEN
ANY ADDITIONAL MEASURES TO DO
SO-- THE POST-9/11 HISTORY WE'RE
ALL SO FAMILIAR WITH NOW MIGHT
HAVE GONE VERY DIFFERENTLY.
>> Ifill: BRIAN FISHMAN, YOU
SPENT A LOT OF TIME READING
VARIOUS PREVIOUS TRAWRCHS OF
THESE DOCUMENTS, OR SIMILAR
DOCUMENTS THAT HAVE BEEN
RELEASED.
SOME OF THE LETTERS THAT ARE
CONTAINED IN THERE ARE MUNDANE.
SOME OF THEM ARE CHILLING.
SOME OF THEM REVEAL PARANOIA.
>> YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK THE MUNDANE LETTERS, THE
SORT OF BANALITY OF THE PROCESS
OF ORGANIZING A TERRORIST GROUP
LIKE AL QAEDA ACTUALLY IS
SOMETHING WE'VE SEEN OVER AND
OVER AND OVER AGAIN.
AFTER WE INVADED AFGHANISTAN IN
2001, WE FOUND SIMILAR DOCUMENTS
WITH APPLICATION PROCESSES AND
SAW THE SAME THING, ACTUALLY, IN
AL QAEDA IN IRAQ AND THE ISLAMIC
STATE OF IRAQ IN 2006 AND 2007
WITH THEIR FOREIGN FIGHTERS.
THE THING THAT REALLY JUMPED OUT
TO ME ABOUT THESE DOCUMENTS IS
THAT OSAMA BIN LADEN WAS CLEARLY
ENGAGED IN THE PROCESS OF
MANAGING HIS NETWORK UP UNTIL,
YOU KNOW, JUST A FEW MONTHS
BEFORE HE WAS KILLED.
WE SAW A LOT OF LETTERS
PRIMARILY TO A MAN NAMED ABDAL
RAHMAN IN 2010 AND 2011.
IT'S INTERESTING EVEN AS OSAMA
BIN LADEN BECAME MORE ISOLATED
IN THAT SAFE HOUSE IN PAKISTAN--
AND AS GREGG SAID, HE HAD
CONCERNS ABOUT THAT PROCESS--
BUT JIHADIS AND MEMBERS OF THE
AL QAEDA NETWORK CLEARLY STILL
SAW HIM AS THIS SORT OF FINAL
ARBITER OF DISPUTES.
AND THAT'S A REALLY INTERESTING
DYNAMIC BECAUSE ONLY OSAMA BIN
LADEN SORT OF HAD THE AUTHORITY
WITHIN THE MOVEMENT TO PLAY THAT
KIND OF ROLE.
AND WE THINK ABOUT HIS SUCCESSOR
AFTER HE WAS KILLED, AL-ZAWAHIRI
HARI, IT'S NOT CLEAR HE HAS THE
SAME KIND OF AUTHORITY AND THE
MOVEMENT TO PROJECT THAT KIND OF
LEADERSHIP EVEN THOUGH HE ISN'T
HEARD FROM VERY OFTEN.
>> Ifill: GREG MILLER, THERE
HAVE BEEN THESE QUESTIONS AS WE
REPORTED RAISED ABOUT THE
CIRCUMSTANCES OF BIN LADEN'S
DEATH, THE OF AND WHETHER THE
WAY THE UNITED STATES HAS TOLD
THE STORY IS ACURACTE, BUT THESE
DOCUMENTS DON'T REALLY SPEAK TO
THAT?
>> I MEAN, TO THE EXTENT THAT
THESE ARE-- THAT THESE ARE
MESSAGES FROM BIN LADEN IN WHICH
HE MAKES NO REFERENCE TO BEING
DETAINED BY PAKISTANI
AUTHORITIES OR UNDER THEIR THUMB
IN ANY WAY OR EVEN CONCERNED
ABOUT PAKISTANIS AGENCIES LIKE
THE I.S.I.
HE'S COMMUNICATING WITH HIS
FOLLOWERS, AS BRIAN SAID.
HE'S ACTIVE UNTIL THE VERY--
UNTIL SHORTLY BEFORE THE VERY
END.
HE IS TRYING TO RUN THIS TERROR
NETWORK.
HE'S MAKING PLANS, EXPRESSING
AMBITIONS, NOT BEHAVING LIKE
SOMEBODY WHO HAS BEEN IN THE THE
CUSTODY OF THE I.S.I. FOR FOUR
OR FIVE YEARS.
>> Ifill: AND GREG MILLER,
TELL US A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE
PROCESS HERE.
WHY ARE WE JUST DECLASSIFYING
THESE DOCUMENTS NOW?
>> WELL, THE U.S. OFFICIALS SAID
TODAY THAT THIS WAS IN THE WORKS
FOR SOME TIME AND IN FACT, THIS
IS THE SECOND OR THIRD TIME THAT
THE U.S. HAS DECLASSIFIED
DOCUMENTS FROM THAT COMPOUND.
I MEAN, WE SAW RIGHT AFTER THE
RAID THERE WAS A GOOD DEAL OF
INFORMATION RELEASED.
AND THEN IN THE YEARS SINCE,
EVEN MORE MATERIAL HAS COME OUT.
BUT I MEAN, THE D.N.I. SAID
TODAY THIS IS PART OF AN ONGOING
PROCESS AND WE'RE GOING TO SEE
ADDITIONAL TRARCHS LIKE THIS
OVER TIME.
>> Ifill: BRIAN FISHMAN, HIS
VIEW WAS TO FOCUS ON THE UNITED
STATES BUT NOT SO MUCH ON WHAT
WE HAVE SEEN HAPPEN SINCE HIS
DEATH, WHICH IS THE RISE OF ISIS
AND DIFFERENT GROUPS SUCCEEDING
AND ECLIPSING AL QAEDA IN THE
PLACE WHERE HE USED TO CONTROL.
>> YEAH, I MEAN, I THINK OSAMA
BIN LADEN HAD CONCERNS ABOUT
TRYING TO ESTABLISH STATES,
WHETHER IT WAS IN IRAQ, WHETHER
IT WAS IN NORTH AFRICA, IN
SOMALIA.
HE WAS WORRIED THAT HIS
AFFILIATE ORGANIZATIONS AND HIS
FOLLOWERS WOULD GET BOGGED DOWN
IN SORT OF THE BANALITIES OF
ADMINISTRATION AND HAVING TO
WORRY ABOUT FUND RAISING AND
DOING THOSE SORTS OF THINGS, AND
THOSE WOULD DETRACT FROM THE
LARGER MISSION WHICH HE SAW AS
GETTING THE UNITED STATES,
FORCING THE UNITED STATES TO
LOSE ITS WILL TO SUPPORT MUSLIM
GOVERNMENTS IN WHAT HE CONSIDERS
THE ISLAMIC WORLD.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, BECAUSE WHAT
BIN LADEN BEES IS THAT YOU HAVE
TO TAKE THE UNITED STATES ON THE
OF-- OR BELIEVED-- IS THAT YOU
HAVE TO TAKE THE UNITED STATES
OUT OF THE PICTURE BEFORE YOU
CAN TOPPLE THOSE GOVERNMENTS AND
THEN STAND UP NEW STATES IN
SOCIETIES.
AND HE WORRIED THAT HIS
FOLLOWERS WERE SORT OF JUMPING
THE GUN AND TRYING TO ESTABLISH
POLITICAL HIERARCHIES BEFORE THE
TIME WAS RIGHT.
>> Ifill: AND GREG MILLER
LET'S TALK ABOUT THOSE BOOKS ON
HIS BOOKSHELF THAT WE HEARD
ABOUT TODAY.
WHAT DO THEY TELL BUS HIM?
DID HE HAVE ENOUGH OF A GRASP OF
ENGLISH, FOR INSTANCE, TO HAVE
ACTUALLY BEEN ABLE TO READ THOSE
BOOKS?
>> U.S. OFFICIALS BELIEVE HE HAD
THE ABILITY TO UNDERSTAND AND
READ ENGLISH AT A BASIC LEVEL.
WE DIDN'T MENTION IT, BUT HE WAS
CLEARLY A FAN OF BRIAN'S.
HE HAD A NUMBER OF THE CENTER AT
WEST POINT'S REPORTS IN HIS
TROVE.
MOST OF THESE BOOKS, OBVIOUSLY
ARE, NONFICTION.
A LOT OF THEM ARE ABOUT U.S.
INSTITUTIONS AND CRITIQUES OF
U.S. POLICY, BASICALLY A STUDENT
OF U.S. FOREIGN POLICY.
AND IT LOOKS LIKE WHEN YOU LOOK
THROUGH THESE TITLES, HE'S
TRYING TO SEARCH FOR
VULNERABILITIES, VULNERABILITIES
IN EVERYTHING FROM THE FEDERAL
RESERVE TO U.S. BALLOTING FRAUD
TO U.S. MILITARY STRATEGIES, AND
JUST SORT OF MESSAGING
VULNERABILITIES OF THE UNITED
STATES.
>> Ifill: GREG MILLER OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST" AND BRIAN
FISHMAN AT THE NEW AMERICA
FOUNDATION AND THE COMBATING
TERRORISM CENTER AT WEST POINT,
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>HANK T YOU.
>> Woodruff: NOW, THE LASTING
IMPACT OF AMERICA'S BIGGEST
OFFSHORE OIL SPILL.
IT COMES AS OFFICIALS ARE
GRAPPLING WITH A NEW SPILL ALONG
THE COAST OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA
NEAR SANTA BARBARA.
IT BEGAN YESTERDAY WHEN AN
ONSHORE PIPELINE RUPTURED.
SLICKS ARE NOW SPANNING A TOTAL
OF NINE MILES AND THE LINE WAS
OPERATING AT FULL CAPACITY WHEN
IT BROKE.
TODAY, A NEW STUDY BY
RESEARCHERS AT THE NATIONAL
OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC
ADMINISTRATION LOOKED AT WHY
DOLPHINS DIED IN SUCH LARGE
NUMBERS AFTER THE DEEPWATER
HORIZON SPILL OF 2010.
IT WAS THE STRONGEST LINK YET
TO THE SPILL AND THE DEATHS OF
BOTTLENOSE DOLPHINS.
MORE THAN 1,000 DOLPHINS HAVE
DIED IN THE GULF SINCE 2010.
THE SPILL LASTED NEARLY THREE
MONTHS, SPEWING MILLIONS
OF GALLONS OF OIL AND CHEMICALS
INTO THE GULF OF MEXICO.
WE GET THE LATEST FROM WILLIAM
BRANGHAM, WHO WEEKEND VIEWERS
WILL RECOGNIZE, AND IS NOW HERE
WITH US AS OUR NEWEST NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT.
>> THANKS, JUDY, GREAT TO BE
HERE.
>> Woodruff: LET'S TALK ABOUT
WHAT RESEARCHERS ARE SAYING.
WHAT DO THEY SAY THESE NEW
STUDIES SHOW?
>> WHAT THEY'RE SAYING IS THAT
THIS HAS BEEN THE FIRST
DEFINITIVE LINK WHERE THEY CAN
DIRECTLY CONNECT THE DEATH, THIS
MASSIVE DIE-OFF OF DOLPHINS-- I
THINK 1200, THAN00 DOLPHINS--
LINKING THOSE DEATHS DIRECTLY
WITH THE OIL SPILL.
SCIENTISTS HAVE BEEN STUDYING
THESE DOLPHINS FOR SEVERAL
YEARS, EVER SINCE THE SPILL
OCCURRED.
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME THEY'VE
SAID, WE NOW KNOW WHY THEY DIED
AND IN SUCH LARGE NUMBERS AND
IT'S BECAUSE OF THE DEEPWATER
HORIZON DISASTER.
>> Woodruff: B.P. IS PUSHING
BACK, OF COURSE.
THEY ARE SAYING THERE'S NO PROOF
THAT THERE'S A CONNECTION FROM
THE OIL THAT CAME OUT OF THE
DEEPWATER HORIZON RIG.
WHAT DO SCIENTISTS SAY ABOUT
THAT?
>> THAT'S TRUE.
THIS HAS BEEN B.P.'S ARGUMENT
ALL ALONG, AND IN FACT THEY'VE
ALSO POINTED OUT THAT THERE WERE
DIE-OFFS OF DOLPHINS THAT HAPPEN
ALL THE TIME ON THE GULF, AND
THAT ACTUALLY SOME OF THESE
DOLPHINS HAD DIED OFF BEFORE THE
SPILL EVEN OCCURRED.
BUT SCIENTISTS WENT TO GREAT
LENGTHS TODAY TO SAY THAT THEY
LOOKED AT ALL THE OTHER FACTORS
THAT HAVE CAUSED DIE-OFFS IN THE
PAST, AND THAT THIS PARTICULAR
SPILL, THE IMPACT THE OIL HAS
HAD ON MARINE MAMAMS, THEY CAN
DIRECTLY CONNECT IT TO THE
DOLPHIPS THAT THEY'VE SEEN.
AND IN FACT THE RESEARCH THAT
THEY DID SHOWED IN THE AREAS
WHERE THERE WAS MORE OIL IN THE
WATER, MORE DOLPHINS DIED, AREAS
WHERE THERE WAS LESS OIL, LESS
DOLPHINS DIED.
>> Woodruff: ARE THE
BOTTLENOSED DOLPHINS STILL DYING
OFF, OR WAS THIS A ONE-TIME
PHENOMENON?
>> THE DEATHS HAV DEATHS HAVE OR
SINCE THE SPILL BEGAN ALL THE
WAY TO THE PRESENT DAY.
THE CURRENT STUDY ONLY LOOKED AT
A COUPLE OF YIERS AFTER THE
SPILL, AND WHAT THEY DID IS
EXAMINED 46 PARTICULAR DOLPHINS
THAT DIED AND THEY WERE QUICKLY
ABLE TO CATCH THEM ON THE THEY
ANALYZED THEIR TISSUES AND FOUND
LUNG AND ADRENAL GLAND PROBLEMS.
SO THIS IS-- THEY THINK THIS MAY
BE AN ONGOING PROBLEM BUT THIS
STUDY JUST LOOKED AT THIS
PARTICULAR PERIOD.
>> Woodruff: AND DO THEY OFFER
AN EXPLANATION FOR WHY THEY'RE
SEEING THIS WITH THE BOTTLENOSED
DOLPHINS BUT NOT WITH OTHER
ANIMAL SPECIES-- CRAB, FISH,
SHRIMP, AND SO FORTH.
>> THE IMPACT ON THOSE OTHER
SPECIES MAY OCCUR.
THEY JUST HAVEN'T FOUND THE DATA
ON THEM YET.
THE REASON THAT DOLPHINS,
SCIENTIST SAYS, ARE PARTICULARLY
ACUTE WAYS TO UNDERSTAND THIS IS
THAT IF YOU THINK ABOUT HOW A
DOLPHIN LIVES, THEY'RE MAMMALS.
THEY BREATHE AIR.
SO DURING THE SPILL, THEY COME
TO THE SURFACE TO BREATHE.
THEY ENTERTAIN AREA OF THE WATER
WHERE THE OIL IS SITTING, AND SO
THEY TAKE A HUGE, DEEP BREATH
WITH SUCK OIL
AND CHEMICALS INTO THAT, THEM
THEY TAKE A DEEP DIVE AND HOLD
THAT BREATH FOR A VERY LONG
PERIOD OF TIME.
THEY'RE PARTICULARLY ABLE TO, IN
ESSENCE, SUCK IN THE OIL AND
CAUSE GREAT DEALS OF PROBLEMS.
ALSO, THE SCIENTISTS WERE ABLE,
TO ALL THROUGHOUT THE SPILL,
FIND THESE DOLPHINS.
THEY WERE ABLE TO GO OUT AND
FIND THEM-- THEY'RE VERY LARGE
MAMMALS SWIMMING AROUND IN THE
WATER.
THEY CAN OBSERVE THEM, THEY CAN
CAPTURE THEM AND DO TESTS ON
THEM WHEN THEY'RE ALIVE AND WHEN
DOLPHINS DIE THEY WASH UP ON THE
BEACHES UNLIKE OTHER ANIMALS
THAT MIGHT DIE AND FALL TO THE
OCEAN FLOOR.
A DOLPHIN WASHES UP ON A BEACH,
PEOPLE PAY ATTENTION.
THEY CALL IN LOCAL OFFICIAL OFFD
SCIENTISTS CAN QUICKLY EXAMINE
THEM BEFORE THE TISSUE
DETERIORATES.
>> Woodruff: I KNOW PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO LISTEN TO THIS AND ASK
WHAT ABOUT THOSE OTHER ANIMALS?
AREHEY SAYING NOTHING IS GOING
TO HAPPEN DOWN THE LINE TO THEM,
AND PARTICULAR HE, WHAT ABOUT
THE POTENTIAL SEAFOOD IN THE
GULF?
>> THAT, OF COURSE, IS ALWAYS A
CONCERN OF CONSUMERS ALL OVER
THE COUNTRY.
THERE ARE CURRENT RESEARCH
PROJECTS GOING ON UNDER SEA
TURTLES TO SEE THE IMPACTS ON
THEM, AND SEVERAL OTHER GULF
SPECIES.
AS FAR AS THE FOOD THAT WE EAT,
THE SHRIMP AND THE CRAB THAT
WE'RE USED TO, THE F.D.A. AND
ALL OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
SCIENTISTS THAT LOOK AT THIS
HAVE DECLARED THAT THOSE
ANIMALS, AT LEAST THE IMPACTS
THAT WE WOULD EXPERIENCE BY
EATING THEM, THOSE SEAM TO BE
FINE AND HAVE-- WE'VE BEEN GIVEN
THE GREEN LIGHT TO EAT GULF
SEAFOOD AGAIN.
>> Woodruff: BUT THE RESEARCH
IS ONGOING, MEANTIME.
>> CORRECT.
>> Woodruff: WILLIAM BRANGHAM,
THANK YOU, AND AGAIN, WELCOME TO
THE NEWSHOUR.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH, GREAT TO
BE HERE.
>> Woodruff: WE HAVE A NOTE TO
ADD.
LATE TODAY
A $211 MILLION
SETTLEMENT WAS ANNOUNCED BETWEEN
TRANSOCEAN WHICH IS THE OPENER
OF THE DEEPWATER HORIZON RIG,
AND BUSINESS AND INDIVIDUALS
CLAIMING DAMAGES FROM THAT 2010
GULF OF MEXICO OIL SPILL.
>> Ifill: HAVE YOU EVER WORRIED
YOU MIGHT LOSE YOUR JOB TO A
ROBOT?
HARI SREENIVASAN FINDS IT COULD
WELL HAPPEN, WITH ADVANCES IN
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, OR
A.I., TRANSFORMING THE
WORKFORCE.
THAT'S THE LATEST REPORT IN OUR
SERIES ON INVENTION AND
INNOVATION, "BREAKTHROUGHS."
>> Sreenivasan: IN A CLOSELY
WATCHED "BRAINS VS. ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE" POKER MATCH, HELD
IN PITTSBURGH EARLIER THIS
MONTH, HUMANS PULLED OFF A SLIM
WIN OVER A COMPUTER PROGRAM
NAMED CLAUDICO.
>> ALRIGHT.
>> GOOD JOB.
>> GOOD GAMES, GUYS.
>> Sreenivasan: TUOMAS SANDHOLM,
A COMPUTER SCIENTIST AT CARNEGIE
MELLON UNIVERSITY, CREATED THE
ALGORITHMS THAT RUN CLAUDICO'S
A.I.
>> THOSE ALGORITHMS FIGURE OUT
HOW YOU SHOULD ACT
STRATEGICALLY; HOW DO YOU AVOID
OR DEAL WITH HUMANS TRYING TO
DECEIVE YOU AND HOW DO YOU
DECEIVE HUMANS.
>> Sreenivasan: SANDHOLM
PREDICTS CLAUDICO WILL BE ABLE
TO BEAT ITS HUMAN OPPONENTS
WITHIN ONE TO FIVE YEARS, MUCH
TO THE CHAGRIN OF BJORN LI, THE
LEADING POKER PLAYER IN THIS
TOURNAMENT.
>> WHEN THAT HAPPENS, POKER WILL
PRETTY MUCH BE DEAD.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT PUTTING PRO
POKER PLAYERS OUT OF WORK IS
NOT WHAT SANDHOLM FOCUSES ALL
HIS TIME ON.
THERE ARE OTHER THINGSHAT T
CLAUDICO CAN ALREADY DO BETTER
THAN HUMANS.
>> SO IN MY LAB WE DEVELOPED AN
ALGORITHM FOR SOLVING THE
MATCHING PROGRAM FOR THE
NATIONWIDE KIDNEY EXCHANGE.
FOR 60% OF THE TRANSPLANTS IN
THE U.S., AND THERE TWICE A
WEEK, OUR ALGORITHMS MAKE THE
TRANSPLANTATION PLAN FOR THE
WHOLE COUNTRY WITHOUT ANY MANUAL
INTERVENTION.
WITH THE SCARCITY OF ORGANS, THE
AI IS MAKING DECISIONS IN AN
OPTIMAL WAY.
>> Sreenivasan: MATCHING THE
RIGHT KIDNEY TO THE RIGHT
PATIENT IS ONE EXAMPLE OF AN
ALGORITHMIC ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE.
BUT THERE ARE MUCH LARGER
DEMONSTRATIONS HITTING THE
ROAD- QUITE LITERALLY.
DAIMLER HAS DEVELOPED A
PROTOTYPE - DUBBED THE
"FREIGHTLINER INSPIRATION TRUCK"
THAT'S BEING TEST-DRIVEN ACROSS
NEVADA.
THE HOPE IS THAT COMPUTER DRIVEN
TRUCKS CAN REDUCE THE NUMBER OF
ACCIDENTS.
THERE ARE CURRENTLY 5,000
FATALITIES A YEAR INVOLVING
TRUCKS.
DRIVERS WOULD FUNCTION MORE LIKE
PILOTS, OVERSEEING COMPUTERIZED
SYSTEMS.
BUT IT BEGS THE QUESTION: WHAT
JOBS WILL SURVIVE IN A NEW
ECONOMY, DRIVEN BY AUTOMATION?
REMEMBER KEN JENNINGS, THE
"JEOPARDY!" GAME SHOW CHAMPION
WHO LOST TO I.B.M.'S WATSON IN
2011, HE SAYS THE WRITING IS ON
THE WALL.
HERE HE IS IN A TED TALK.
>> AND I REMEMBER STANDING THERE
BEHIND THE PODIUM AS I COULD
HEAR THAT LITTLE INSECTOID THUMB
TICKING.
AND YOU COULD HEAR THAT LITTLE
TICK, TICK, TICK, AND I REMEMBER
THINKING, THIS IS IT.
I FELT OBSOLETE.
I FELT LIKE A DETROIT FACTORY
WORKER OF THE '80s SEEING A
ROBOT THAT COULD NOW DO HIS JOB
ON THE ASSEMBLY LINE.
AND IT WAS FRIGGIN'
DEMORALIZING.
>> Sreenivasan: IT'S NOT JUST
QUIZ SHOW CONTESTANTS THAT ARE
AT RISK, AS MORE AND MORE JOBS
ARE AUTOMATED.
JENNINGS' EXPERIENCE COULD BE A
HARBINGER OF THINGS TO COME FOR
THAT'S THE ARGUMENT MADE IN A
NEW BOOK, "RISE OF THE ROBOTS:
TECHNOLOGY AND THE REATTH OF A
JOBLESS FUTURE," BY MARTIN FORD.
>> GOING FORWARD WE MAY SEE
AUTOMATION UNFOLD IN A KIND OF
TOP HEAVY PATTERN; WHERE A LOT
OF THE BEST JOBS ARE THE ONES TO
BE IMPACTED.
LAWYERS, PHARMACISTS, CERTAIN
AREAS OF MEDICINE LIKE PATHOLOGY
& RADIOLOGY; ANY KIND OF WHITE
COLLAR JOB WHERE YOU ARE SITTING
AT A COMPUTER OR A DESK; THE
PEOPLE WHO YOU MIGHT CALL OFFICE
DRONES; THOSE ARE GOING TO BE
VERY SUSCEPTIBLE TO THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, THERE COULD
BE MAJOR DISRUPTIONS TO THE U.S.
ECONOMY SAYS DAPHNE KOLLER.
SHE'S AN A.I. SCIENTIST, AND
ALSO PRESIDENT OF THE MASSIVE
ONLINE LEARNING COMPANY
COURSERA.
>> WE ARE ALREADY STARTING TO
SEE JOBS THAT WERE THOUGHT OF AS
INTELLIGENT, BEING OUTSOURCED TO
COMPUTERS.
FOR EXAMPLE, A LARGE PART OF A
PARALEGAL'S JOB, WHICH IS
HUNTING DOWN THE RELEVANT
REFERENCES FOR A PARTICULAR
PROBLEM IS SOMETHING THAT YOU
WOULD HAVE THOUGHT REQUIRES
INTELLIGENCE.
NOW THERE ARE PRETTY GOOD
SOFTWARE SYSTEMS THAT DO-- NOT
100% OF A PARALEGAL'S JOB BUT
80% TO 90%.
>> Sreenivasan: WILL ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE SOFTWARE DO TO THE
PARALEGAL WHAT THE TRACTOR DID
TO THE FARMER?
>> IT IS QUITE LIKELY THAT THAT
WILL HAPPEN.
I THINK THAT THERE WILL BE
ENTIRE JOB CATEGORIES THAT WILL
GO AWAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WE HUMANS HAVE
ALWAYS BEEN RESILIENT.
WITH EACH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION,
WE'VE ADAPTED, CREATING NEW JOBS
WITH NEW TECHNOLOGIES.
>> THE OPTIMISTIC PERSPECTIVE IS
THAT THIS WILL HAPPEN HERE AND
THAT THE JOBS THAT WILL BE
CREATED WILL BY NATURE BE HIGHER
AND MORE COGNITIVELY INTERESTING
JOBS THAT ARE BEYOND THESPECTRUL
INTELLIGENCE CAN DO.
>> Sreenivasan: LEAVING THE LESS
INTERESTING JOBS TO ROBOTIC
HELPERS LIKE BOTLR, AN AUTOMATED
BELLHOP CRUISING THE HALLS OF
THE ALOFT HOTEL.
IS THAT SUCH A BAD THING?
STUART RUSSELL, WHO DIRECTS THE
AI LAB AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA AT BERKELEY, DOESN'T
THINK SO.
>> SOME PEOPLE THINK THAT
INEVITABLY EVERY ROBOT THAT DOES
ANY TASK IS A BAD THING FOR THE
HUMAN RACE, BECAUSE IT COULD BE
TAKING A JOB AWAY.
THAT ISN'T NECESSARILY TRUE.
YOU CAN ALSO THINK OF THE ROBOT
AS MAKING A PERSON MORE
PRODUCTIVE AND ENABLING PEOPLE
TO DO THINGS THAT ARE CURRENTLY
ECONOMICALLY INFEASIBLE.
A PERSON PLUS A ROBOT, OR A
FLEET OF ROBOTS, COULD DO THINGS
THAT WOULD BE REALLY USEFUL FOR
US.
>> Sreenivasan: A PERHAPS SIMPLE
EXAMPLE, CLEANING UP GRAFFITI.
>> IN MANY, MANY CITIES,
GRAFFITI IS JUST LEFT BECAUSE
IT'S TOO EXPENSIVE, BUT IF I HAD
A TEAM OF ROBOTS THAT I COULD
TAKE AROUND THE CITY WITH ME AND
POINT THEM TO WHAT NEEDED TO BE
CLEANED UP, I COULD GET 10 TIMES
AS MUCH DONE.
AND THERE WOULD BE POSITIONS FOR
GRAFFITI CLEANING SUPERVISORS,
WHICH DIDN'T EXIST BEFORE.
>> Sreenivasan: GRAFFITI
CLEANING SUPERVISING ROBOTS
MIGHT EXIST IN THE FUTURE BUT
OUR ECONOMY IS ALREADY EVOLVING.
THERE ARE PLENTY OF JOBS THAT
DIDN'T EXIST 10 YEARS AGO THAT
ARE NOW IN HIGH DEMAND, IN
FIELDS LIKE DIGITAL MARKETING
AND DATA ANALYSIS.
IN FACT, ACCORDING TO McKINSEY &
COMPANY, THE UNITED STATES FACES
A SHORTAGE OF DATA ANALYSTS.
ALMOST 190,000 PEOPLE ARE NEEDED
TO ANALYZE AND UNDERSTAND BIG
DATA.
BUT WILL THOSE JOBS ULTIMATELY
BE FILLED BY PEOPLE OR BY "DEEP
LEARNING" MACHINES?
"DEEP LEARNING" IS A NEW TYPE OF
A.I. THAT RELIES ON "NEURAL
NETWORKS.
THEY'RE COMPUTER PROGRAMS
MODELED AFTER THE HUMAN BRAIN
AND NERVOUS SYSTEM.
>> HEY GUYS.
HOW'S THE TRAINING PAGE LOOKING?
>> Sreenivasan: AT THE PALO ALTO
OFFICE OF METAMIND, ENGINEERS
ARE USING THE TECHNOLOGY TO HELP
COMPUTERS SEE BY QUICKLY
IDENTIFYING IMAGES AND PLACING
THEM IN CATEGORIES.
THE FTWASORE CAN ALSO UNDERSTAND
NUANCE IN THE WRITTEN WORD.
RICHARD SOCHER IS CO-FOUNDER AND
C.T.O.
HE SAYS THE TECHNOLOGY WILL AID
HUMANS, NOT REPLACE THEM.
>> IF YOU CAN BRING THE
INTELLIGENCE OF THE SMARTEST
PEOPLE IN THE FIELD AND INSTILL
IT IN AN ALGORITHM WITH DEEP
LEARNING, YOU CAN REALLY HELP
PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE EXAMPLE, HE
SAYS, IS IN THE FIELD OF
MEDICINE.
>> IF THE BEST DOCTORS IN THE
WORLD TRAIN AN ALGORITHM TO FIND
VARIOUS DIFFERENT PROBLEMS IN
C.T. SCANS AND X-RAYS,
MAMMOGRAMS FOR INSTANCE, YOU
COULD BUILD AN ALGORITHM THAT IS
ALMOST AS GOOD AS THE BEST
DOCTORS IN THE WORLD.
A HUMAN CAN ONLY LOOK AT SO MANY
MAMMOGRAMS IN THEIR LIFETIME.
AN ALGORITHM COULD LOOK AT
MILLIONS AND MILLIONS AND
EVENTUALLY FIND SUBTLE THINGS
THAT MAY HAVE NOT BEEN THAT
OBVIOUS TO THE HUMAN EYE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, HOW WILL
SOCIETY ADAPT TO A COMPUTER
INTELLIGENCE THAT CAN DO WORK,
THAT UNTIL NOW, ONLY HUMANS
COULD?
>> WHAT PEOPLE HAVE GOING FOR
THEM THAT COMPUTERS AS OF YET DO
NOT, IS THE INCREDIBLE
ADAPTABILITY OF THE HUMAN MIND.
THE ABILITY TO LEARN NEW SKILLS.
THE ABILITY TO REALLY ADAPT TO
UNEXPECTED SITUATIONS.
WHAT WE REALLY NEED TO DO IS TO
HELP PEOPLE BECOME EVEN BETTER
AT THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: JUST LIKE IN A
HIGH STAKES POKER GAME, WE DON'T
KNOW WHAT THE OUTCOME WILL BE.
WE HUMANS ARE RAISING THE STAKES
AS WE CONTINUE TO DRIVE ADVANCES
IN AI TECHNOLOGY, IT WILL BE UP
TO US TO STAY AT THE TABLE.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
>> Woodruff: WATCH MORE STORIES
FROM OUR THINKING MACHINES
SERIES ON OUR WEBSITE
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: ITS' THAT TIME OF YEAR
WHEN STUDENTS, THEIR FAMILIES
AND FRIENDS CELEBRATE
GRADUATION, THEN IMMEDIATELY
TURN TO WORRYING ABOUT THEIR
FUTURES.
SOME COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
ARE WORRYING TOO.
GRADUATING STUDENTS AT SOUTH
CAROLINA STATE UNIVERSITY WALKED
INTO THE SCHOOL'S STADIUM WITH
ALL THE USUAL PRIDE AND GLEE OF
COMMENCEMENT DAY.
BUT MIXED IN WITH THE POMP AND
CIRCUMSTANCE, WAS A CLOUD OF
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT THE FUTURE OF
SOUTH CAROLINA'S ONLY PUBLIC
HISTORICALLY BLACK UNIVERSITY.
THE COMMENCEMENT SPEAKER SENATOR
TIM SCOTT, DID NOT HESITATE TO
RAISE IT.
>> LET ME SAY FIRST AND FOREMOST
THAT WITHOUT ANY QUESTION, MY
PRAYERS ARE WITH SOUTH CAROLINA
STATE UNIVERSITY FOR FINANCIAL
SUCCESS AND FOR PEACE AND FOR
>> Ifill: THE SCHOOL'S MOUNTING
FINANCIAL TROUBLES INCLUDE A
NEARLY $23 MILLION DEFICIT AND,
SINCE 2007, A 40% DROP IN
ENROLLMENT.
ONLY MONTHS AGO, STATE
LEGISLATORS BRIEFLY PROPOSED
CLOSING THE ORANGEBURG SCHOOL
FOR TWO YEARS TO BALANCE THE
BOOKS.
SOUTH CAROLINA STATE IS ONE OF
ABOUT 100 HISTORICALLY BLACK
COLLEGES AND UVERSNIITIES IN THE
NATION, AND AMONG THOSE
STRUGGLING TO SURVIVE.
IN PENNSYLVANIA, CHEYNEY
UNIVERSITY IS FACING ITS OWN
MULTIMILLION DOLLAR DEFICIT.
AND WASHINGTON, D.C.'S
HOWARD UNIITY SHED 200 STAFF
MEMBERS LAST YEAR AND ANNOUNCED
84 MORE LAYOFFS THIS SPRING.
MANY OF THE SCHOOLS HAVE SHED
STUDENTS AS WELL, AND OPERATE
WITHOUT THE CUSHION OF THE
ENDOWMENTS AND ALUMNI DONATIONS
THAT ELITE, PREDOMINANTLY WHITE
SCHOOLS RELY ON.
STATE LAWMAKERS LAST WEEK TURNED
TO THE WORLDS OF FINANCE AND
ACADEMIA FOR A NEW INTERIM BOARD
OF TRUSTEES FOR SOUTH CAROLINA
STATE.
GILDA COBB-HUNTER HAS
REPRESENTED ORANGEBURG IN THE
STATE HOUSE FOR 24 YEARS.
>> WE NEEDED SOMEONE TO
RECOGNIZE THE IMPORTANCE OF
CHECK AND BALANCES,
ACCOUNTABILITY, TRANSPARENCY.
THERE WAS A REAL SYSTEMIC
PROBLEM AT SOUTH CAROLINA STATE,
A PROBLEM THAT HAS GONE ON FOR
25 OR 30 YEARS.
>> Ifill: INTERIM PRESIDENT W.
FRANKLIN EVANS HOPES CONFIDENCE
IN NEW LEADERSHIP COULD LEAD TO
MORE STATE FUNDING.
BUT HE CONCEDED THAT IS NOT THE
ONLY SOLUTION.
>> WE'RE LOOKING AT RIGHTSIZING
ACROSS THE CAMPUS, EVEN LOOKING
AT OUR FACILITIES AND MAKING
SURE THAT WE ARE MAXIMIZING OUR
FACILITY USE IN OUR BUILDING AND
OPTIMIZING EVERY BIT THAT WE CAN
SO WE'RE NOT WASTING ANY MONEY,
WASTING RESOURCES.
>> Ifill: HE'S ALSO LOOKING TO
BUILD ON THE SCHOOL'S STRONGEST
ACADEMIC PROGRAMS, LIKE ONE IN
NUCLEAR ENGINEERING.
KENNETH LEWIS HEADS THAT
PROGRAM, THE ONLY ONE OF ITS
KIND IN SOUTH CAROLINA, AND SAYS
IT SUPPORTS THE KINDS OF
STUDENTS HISTORICALLY BLACK
UNIVERSITIES HAVE FOCUSED ON.
>> A LOT OF OUR KIDS ARE RURAL
KIDS FROM SMALL TOWNS, RURAL
TOWNS IN SOUTH CAROLINA WHERE
THEY MIGHT NOT HAVE CALCULUS FOR
EXAMPLE.
WE SPEND A LOT OF TIME WITH
THOSE KIDS, DEVELOPING TH,EM
ENCOURAGING THEM, AND
STRENGTHENING THEIR BACKGROUND.
>> Ifill: DARIAN JAMES GRADUATED
SUMMA CUM LAUDE FROM THE PROGRAM
THIS YEAR, AND IS HEADING TO THE
UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN TO
PURSUE A Ph.D. IN BIOMEDICAL
ENGINEERING.
>> IT TAUGHT ME TO GET
COMFORTABLE AT BEING
UNCOMFORTABLE.
IT PUSHED ME, IT CHALLENGED ME,
SO GOING TO ANY OTHER SCHOOL I
FEEL LIKE I CAN MAKE IT.
>> Ifill: SOUTH CAROLINA STATE'S
NEW TRUSTEES MET FOR THE FIRST
TIME TODAY.
>> Ifill: HOW CAN THESE SCHOOLS
RISE TO THE CHALLENGES FACING
HIGHER EDUCATION TODAY?
FOR THAT, WE TURN TO JOHNNY
TAYLOR, PRESIDENT AND C.E.O.
OF THE THURGOOD MARSHALL
COLLEGE FUND.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
WE JUST HEARD THE PRESIDENT OF
SOUTH CAROLINA STATE TALKING
ABOUT OPTIMIZING AND RIGHT
SIZING AND WORDS WHICH SOUNDS
LIKE IT COMES FROM "HOW TO FIX A
SCHOOL?"
HOW DOES SOUTH CAROLINA STATE DO
SO POORLY WHEN OTHER SCHOOLS DO
SO WELL?
WHAT'S THE ROOT PROBLEM?
>> THE ROOT PROBLEM IS ABOUT
LEADERSHIP, AND IT'S NOT JUST
THE STAFF LEADERSHIP BUT IT'S
ALSO GOVERNANCE.
SO THE BOARD LEADERSHIP AND THE
STAFF LEADERSHIP.
AND BY THE WAY, THAT HAPPENS TO
BE THE CASE AT MANY INSTITUTION,
NOT JUST H.P.C.U.s.
BUT AT ITS CORE.
IF WE DON'T FIX THE PROBLEM--
AND IT'S A PEOPLE PROBLEMUE CAN
THROW AS MUCH MONEY AS YOU WANT
AT AN INSTITUTION, IF THEY HAVE
THE WRONG SORT OF GOVERNANCE AND
THE WRONG PROFESSIONAL STAFF
THEN ALL THE DOLLARS IN THE
WORLD WON'T SOLVE THE PROBLEM.
>> Ifill: ARE H.P.C.U.s
UNIQUELY AT RISK?
>> YES, LARGELY BECAUSE WE WERE
FIRST HISTORICALLY UNDERFUNDED.
CHECK, HAVE THAT.
BUT THEN WE CONTINUE TO LIVE-- I
DON'T THINK WE'VE HAD A REAL
DISCUSSION ABOUT THE APPROPRIATE
NEW MISSION FOR H.P.C.U.s.
WHAT IS THEIR MARKET?
WHO ARE THEY SERVICEs?
>> Ifill: WHAT IS THAT?
AS YOU SIT HERE AND SET OUT ON A
MISSION TO EDUCATE YOUNG BLACK
STUDENTS, WHAT SHOULD THE
MISSION BE?
>> SO AT ITS CORE IT IS
EDUCATING AFRICAN AMERICAN
STUDENTS.
I MEAN, THAT IS THE POINT OF
HAVING A HISTORICALLY BLACK
COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY, BUT
WE'VE GOT TO IDENTIFY MAJORS AND
PROGRAMS THAT ARE RELEVANT TO
THE MARKET.
YOU KNOW, WHAT ARE EMPLOYERS
LOOKING AT HIRING?
IF STUDENTS ARE MAJORING IN
PARTICULAR MAJORS THAT ARE NO
LONGER RELEVANT TO THE MARKET,
THEN THEY'RE NOT DOING THEIR
JOBS.
THESE KIDS ARE INCURRING
SIGNIFICANT AMOUNTS OF STUDENT
DEBT TO GET A DEGREE, AND IF YOU
GO OUT AND THAT DEGREE DOESN'T
PAY OFF, THEN FAILS, AND,
THEREFORE, THERE'S NO INCENTIVE
FOR OTHER STUDENTS TO COME TO
THE UNIVERSITY.
>> Ifill: HAS THE EDUCATION
LANDSCAPE IN GENERAL SHIFTED AS
WELL?
WE USED TO SAY IN THE BLACK
COMMUNITY IF SOMEBODY ELSE
CAUGHT A COLD WE CAUGHT YO
PNEUMONIA.
IS THAT THE THE CASE AS WELL FOR
H.P.C.U.s.
>> SOMEWHAT BUT THERE'S BEEN
SUCH DISRUPTION IN HIGHER
EDUCATION GENERALLY.
YOU HAVE MAJORITY INSTITUTION
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS AND
STRUGGLING AS WELL.
YOU HAVE A SCHOOL LIKE SWEET
BRIAR DOWN IN GEORGIA STLAIRG
JCHT ANNOUNCED ITS LAST
GRADUATING CLASS.
THEY HAVE A $100 MILLION
ENDOWMENT.
THE BUSINESS OF HIGHER EDUCATION
HAS CHANGED SO SIGNIFICANTLY
THAT THIS IS NOT UNIQUE TO
H.P.C.U.s.
TO BE FAIR WE'RE HISTORICALLY
UNDERFUNDD AND TO THE YOUR
POINT, THE REST OF THE WORLD
GETS A COLD AND WE GET PNEUMONIA
PAZ WE HAVE BEEN HISTORICALLY
UNDERFUNDED BUT THAT IS NOT
UNIQUE TO THE H.P.C.U. SPACE.
>> Ifill: WE HAVE DONE A LOT
OF REPORTING ON THIS PROGRAM
ABOUT ONLINE EDUCATION.
HAS THAT CHANGED THE
RESPONSIBILITIES, THE GOALS,
WHAT THE STRUCTURE SHOULD BE FOR
AN UNDERFUNDED UNIVERSITY?
>> EVERYTHING HAS CHANGED.
THERE HAS BEEN SUCH DISRUPTION.
THINK ABOUT IT.
WHO WOULD HAVE THOUGHT 50 YEARS
AGO THERE WOULD BE A UNIVERSITY
OF PHOENIX, AND ALL THE ONLINE
FOR-PROFIT INSTITUTIONS. AND
MANY STUDENTS ARE ATTENDING
REPUTABLE INSTITUTIONS WITH FULL
ON-LINE DEGREES.
SO, YES, THAT HAS TOTALLY
CHANGED THE GAME.
I AM ON THE BOARD OF THE COOPER
UNION IN NEW YORK, VERY WELL
KNOWN HIGHLY SELECTIVE
INSTITUTION THAT THIS YEAR FOR
THE FIRST TIME EVER HAD TO START
CHARGING REPUTATION.
>> Ifill: IT USED TO HAVE A
REPUTATION OF EVERYTHING BEING
FREE.
>> IS THAT HAPPENING AT A SCHOOL
WITH A $700 MILLION ENDOWMENT
YOU CAN ONLY IMAGINE WHAT
HAPPENS AT THE H.P.C.U., WHERE I
INNING THE AGGREGATE MANY OF OUR
INSTITUTION DON'T HAVE A
$700,000 MILLION EDUCATION.
>> Ifill: DO MANY OF THEM RELY
ON GOVERNMENT FUNDING?
DOES IT HAVE AN EFFECT AS WELL?
>> SIGNIFICANTLY.
80% TO 90% ULTIMATELY EMANATE
THROUGH THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
FOR PEL GRANTS, CERTAIN LOAN
PROGRAMPROGRAMS TO BUILD
INFRASTRUCTURE, GRANT PROGRAMS
FROM VARIOUS FEDERAL AGENCYS.
YES, ALL OF THE INSTITUTION,
EVEN PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS, RELY
HEAVILY ON FEDERAL AND STATE
FUNDING.
>> Ifill: WHEREOES D IT WORK
AND WHERE DOES IT WORK?
>> THE SCHOOLS THAT HAVE FIGURED
IT OUT.
CLAFLIN UNIVERSITY SITS NEXT TO
SOUTH CAROLINA STATE.
IT'S NOT A QUESTION OF RURAL
VERSUS CITY OR BLACK VERSUS
MAJORITY.
IT'S ABOUT LEADERSHIP.
AT ITS CORE, OUR INSTITUTIONS
HAVE GOT TO GET THE RIGHT BOARDS
OF GOVERNORS, BOARDS OF TRUSTEES
AND THOSE INDIVIDUALS HAVE TO
SELECT RIGHT LEADERS AND THOSE
LEADERS HAVE TO EXECUTE THEIR
PLANS.
>> Ifill: WHAT IS THE PUBLIC
INTEREST IN FIXING H.P.C.U.s,
AND NOT FOLDING THEM INTO LARGER
MAINSTREAM ORGANIZATIONS.
>> DESPITE ALL WE HEAR ABOUT
H.P.C.U.s, THEY REPRESENT JUST
3% OF ALL HIGHER EDUCATION BUT
GRADUATE 20% OF ALL AFRICAN
AMERICANS WITH UNDERGRADUATE
DEGREES.
THE POINT IS WHAT HAPPENS TO
AMERICA, ESPECIALLY WHEN THE
PRESIDENT'S NORTH STAR GOAL IS
TOO INCREASE THE NUMBER OF
COLLEGE GRADUATES, IF THOSE
INSTITUTION WENT WHAT, THEN
AMERICA HAS A PROBLEM, NOT JUST
BLACK AMERICA.
>> Ifill: JOHNNY TAYLOR,
PRESIDENT OF THE THURGOOD
MARSHALL COLLEGE FUND, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: WE HAVE MORE ON SOUTH
>> Woodruff: NEXT, COMBATING
EXTREMISM.
IT'S A SUBJECT WE'VE BEEN
EXPLORING CLOSELY RECENTLY.
TONIGHT WE FOCUS ON MOROCCO,
WHERE NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT KIRA KAY GOT
SPECIAL ACCESS TO A GROUP OF
WOMEN ON THE FRONTLINES OF AN
UNUSUAL EFFORT TO WIN OVER
HEARTS AND MINDS.
HER STORY IS PRODUCED IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE BUREAU FOR
INTERNATIONAL REPORTING.
>> Reporter: NESTLED IN A QUIET
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD IN THE
MOROCCAN CAPITAL OF RABAT, THIS
SCHOOL IS THE NERVE CENTER OF AN
AMBITIOUS GOVERNMENT PROGRAM
AIMED AT PROVIDING WHAT IS BEING
CALLED SPRITUAL SECURITY.
HERE, MOROCCO IS TRAINING IMAMS
TO LEAD PRAYERS IN THE COUNTRY'S
MANY MOSQUES.
BUT SITTING NEXT TO THEM, 100
WOMEN.
THEY ARE NOT IMAMS, THAT WORD IS
RESERVED FOR MEN.
THESE STUDENTS ARE STUDYING TO
BECOME MOURCHIDAT, MEANING
SPIRITUAL GUIDES.
THEY WILL DEPLOY ACROSS THE
COUNTRY WITH A TWOFOLD MISSION:
TO RAISE WOMEN'S STATUS IN
MOROCCAN SOCIETY AND COMBAT
EXTREMIST THOUGHT.
EXTREMIST THOUGHT. >> (
translated): I ALWAYS
FELT
>> (translated): I
ALWAYS FELT I WAS MADE FOR THIS
WORK.
I WAS MADE FOR THIS WORK.
IT'S A DREAM COME TRUE!
>> Reporter: FATIMA AIT SALEH IS
A RECENT GRADUATE OF THE
MOURCHIDAT PROGRAM.
MOURCHIDAT PROGRAM. >> (
translated): AS YOU
KNOW,
>> (translated): AS YOU
KNOW, RELIGION CAN BE A
DOUBLE-EDGED
RELIGION CAN BE A DOUBLE-EDGED
SWORD.
THAT IS WHY OUR MISSION AS
MOURCHIDAT IS TO SHOW A TOLERANT
ISLAM, A MODERATE ISLAM THAT
ADVOCATES DIALOG AND ACCEPTANCE
OF OTHERS AND HOW TO STAY FAR
AWAY FROM EXTREMISM.
>> Reporter: THE MOURCHIDAT
STUDENTS ARE AN ELITE GROUP:
ONLY 10% OF APPLICANTS ARE
ACCEPTED; ALL MUST HAVE ALREADY
COMPLETED A BACHELOR'S DEGREE.
THEY STUDY 30 HOURS A WEEK FOR A
YEAR, TOPICS RANGING FROM
FUNDAMENTAL ISLAMIC TEXTS TO
MOROCCAN CIVIL LAW TO HOW TO
WRITE A GOOD RESEARCH PAPER.
WRITE A GOOD RESEARCH PAPER. >>
(translated): THESE
ISSUES
>> (translated): THESE
ISSUES THAT ARE CONNECTED TO
WOMEN, WE
THAT ARE CONNECTED TO WOMEN, WE
NEED TO APPROACH THEM THROUGH
THE PERSPECTIVE OF ISLAMIC LAW.
>> Reporter: MOROCCO TAKES
SPECIAL PRIDE IN THE INNOVATION
OF USING WOMEN TO SPREAD
RELIGIOUS MESSAGES WHEN IMAMS
AND EVEN FATHER'S CAN'T.
AND EVEN FATHER'S CAN'T. >> (
translated): THE RISK OF
>> (translated): THE
RISK OF TERRORISM CAN BEGIN
WITHIN THE
TERRORISM CAN BEGIN WITHIN THE
FAMILY.
>> (translated): THE
MOURCHIDAT IS ABOVE ALL A WOMAN,
A MOTHER, A SISTER.
HER ROLE WITHIN THE FAMILY IS
VERY SACRED.
SHE HAS INFLUENCE IN HER
ENVIRONMENT.
FOR HER INFLUENCE TO WORK IN THE
RIGHT WAY, SHE NEEDS TO BE FULLY
EQUIPPED AND WELL POSITIONED.
THAT'S WHY SHE LEARNS THE SOCIAL
SCIENCES AND ALSO GOOD SKILLS OF
COMMUNICATING WITH MEN AND
WOMEN.
>> Reporter: ZOHRA SEBBTAWI IS
FROM A CITY IN THE NOH OFRT THE
COUNTRY THAT HAS BEEN A HOTBED
FOR EXTREMIST RECRUITMENT.
FOR EXTREMIST RECRUITMENT. >> (
translated): THE MORE WE
>> (translated): THE
MORE WE DELVE INTO IT, THE MORE
WE
DELVE INTO IT, THE MORE WE
REALIZE HOW SENSITIVE OUR
MISSION IS, BECAUSE WE MUST
CORRECT MISCONCEPTIONS OF ISLAM
BY PEOPLE WHO PRETEND TO KNOW
ABOUT IT, BUT ONLY PUT THE
RELIGION IN TROUBLE.
>> Reporter: MOROCCO, WHICH IS A
STRONG U.S. ALLY, SITS IN NORTH
AFRICA, A REGION PLAGUED BY
TERRORIST GROUPS AND FAILED
STATES.
MOROCCAN ISLAM IS ROOTED IN
MYSTIC SUFI TRADITIONS AND IS
CONSIDERED MODERATE.
MOROCCO'S KING IS REVERED AS A
DESCENDANT OF THE PROPHET
MOHAMMED, MAKING HIM NOT JUST A
MONARCH BUT A SPIRITUAL LEADER.
THIS PROMOTES RELIGIOUS AND
POLITICAL COHESION BUT ALSO
GIVES THE GOVERNMENT POWER TO
SOMETIMES MUZZLE DISSENT.
BUT TERROR HAS COME HERE: THE
CASABLANCA BOMBINGS OF 2003
KILLED 33 PEOPLE AND HAVE BEEN
CALLED MOROCCO'S 9/11.
17 PEOPLE, MOSTLY TOURISTS, DIED
IN MARRAKECH IN 2011.
AN ESTIMATED 1,500 YOUNG MEN
HAVE JOINED THE ISLAMIC STATE.
THE MOROCCAN GOVERNMENT IS
FIGHTING BACK BY PROMOTING A
STATE-BRANDED ISLAM.
ISSANDR EL AMRANI IS WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL CRISIS GROUP.
>> MORE THAN PROBABLY ANY OTHER
ARAB COUNTRY, MOROCCO HAS
INVESTED IN THIS AND THOUGHT
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WILL PAY
OFF IN THE LONG TERM.
TRYING NOT JUST TO CONTROL
RELIGIOUS DISCOURSE BUT USING
THAT CONTROL TO PREVENT
RADICALIZATION, TO DE-RADICALIZE
TO SOME EXTENT.
>> Reporter: RECENT GRADUATE
FATIMA AND HER PARTNER HANANE
DAHI ARE TWO OF THE 500
MOURCHIDAT ALREADY WORKING IN
THE FIELD.
THEY SPEND THEIR DAYS IN MOSQUES
AND OTHER PUBLIC SPACES.
THEIR SPEECHES ARE A SURPRISING
BLEND OF TRADITIONAL RELIGIOUS
SERMON AND FEMINIST ACTIVISM.
SERMON AND FEMINIST ACTIVISM. >>
(translated): PERHAPS
IN
>> (translated):
PERHAPS IN OUR HISTORY WOMEN
HAVE FACED
OUR HISTORY WOMEN HAVE FACED
SOME INJUSTICE BECAUSE OF A
MISUNDERSTANDING OF ISLAM.
BUT ALL WOMEN SHOULD BE AWARE OF
THEIR IMPORTANT STATUS: THEY ARE
ENTITLED TO BUY, SELL, MORTGAGE,
OWN EVERYTHING!
OWN EVERYTHING! >> (
translated): THE NUMBER
OF
>> (translated): THE
NUMBER OF WOMEN GOING DAILY TO
THE MOSQUE
WOMEN GOING DAILY TO THE MOSQUE
IS HIGHER THEN THE MEN.
WOMEN AND KIDS ARE MORE
FAITHFUL.
WE MOURCHIDATE ARE TRYING TO
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS PRESENCE.
>> Reporter: NOUFISSA RACHIDI
HAS BEEN ATTENDING THESE
MEETINGS FOR SIX YEARS.
MEETINGS FOR SIX YEARS. >> (
translated): PREVIOUSLY
WE
>> (translated):
PREVIOUSLY WE WOMEN WASTED OUR
TIME IN TRIVIAL
WOMEN WASTED OUR TIME IN TRIVIAL
CONVERSATIONS.
NOW WE ENCOURAGE EACH OTHER TO
UNDERSTAND OUR RELIGION.
IF WOMEN BENEFIT FROM THIS
PROGRAM, THEN THERE IS NO DOUBT
THAT ALL OF SOCIETY BENEFITS,
BECAUSE MOTHERS ARE OUR PRIMARY
EDUCATORS.
>> Reporter: THE MOURCHIDAT ALSO
DO OUTREACH IN THE COUNTRY'S
PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
FATIMA PARTICULARLY RELISHES HER
TIME WORKING WITH YOUNG PEOPLE.
TODAY SHE IS SHARING HER
FAVORITE POEM ABOUT THE PROPHET
MOHAMMED, AND DRAWING REAL-WORLD
LESSONS FROM ITS TEXT.
LESSONS FROM ITS TEXT. >> (
translated): HONESTY
LEADS
>> (translated):
HONESTY LEADS TO HEAVEN.
TO HEAVEN.
WHEN WE ARE HONEST IN OUR LIFE,
ALLAH WILL RECOGNIZE US AS A
TRUSTWORTHY PERSON.
TRUSTWORTHY PERSON. >> (
translated): PROTECTING
>> (translated):
PROTECTING THE YOUTH FROM
EXTREMISM IS A
THE YOUTH FROM EXTREMISM IS A
PART OF OUR MISSION.
THEY ARE ADOLESCENT.
IT'S A CRUCIAL STAGE.
THE VALUES WE ARE TEACHING THEM
MIGHT MAKE IT EASIER FOR THEM TO
AVOID BAD INFLUENCES.
>> Reporter: FATIMA'S HUSBAND
MOHAMED SEES HIS WIFE AS
SOMETHING OF A TRAILBLAZER.
SOMETHING OF A TRAILBLAZER. >> (
translated): I'M PROUD
OF
>> (translated): I'M
PROUD OF HER WORK.
HER WORK.
SHE'S SERVING HER COUNTRY.
I ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THERE ARE
STILL SOME PEOPLE WHO THINK A
WOMAN'S PLACE IS ONLY WITHIN HER
HOME.
BUT THOSE OLD CONVICTIONS ARE
CHANGING.
>> Reporter: AND NOW, MOROCCO IS
EXPANDING ITS SPRITUAL SECURITY
PROGRAM BEYOND ITS BORDERS,
SPENDING MILLIONS TO BRING IN
IMAMS FROM OTHER COUNTRIES FOR
STUDY, MOST NOTABLY FROM MALI,
WHICH HAS BEEN GRAPPLING WITH AN
ISLAMIC INSURGENCY.
THIS IMAM SAW HIS HOME CITY OF
TIMBUKTU OVERTAKEN BY RADICALS.
>> (translated): THIS
PROGRAM
PROGRAM IS RESCUING MUSLIMS FROM
THE
IS RESCUING MUSLIMS FROM THE
TIGHT SPOT WE ARE IN.
IF ISLAM IS TRULY UNDERSTOOD,
SECURITY WILL COME, JUSTICE WILL
COME, PEACE OF MIND WILL COME.
>> Reporter: AND UPSTAIRS FROM
THE MALIANS SITS A FIRST CLASS
OF IMAMS FROM FRANCE.
INITIATED BEFORE THE CHARLIE
HEBDO ATTACKS BUT NOW TAKING ON
NEW RELEVANCE.
THERE IS SOME POLITICAL GAIN FOR
MOROCCO AS WELL, SAYS ANALYST
ISSANDR EL AMRANI.
>> MOROCCO IS NOT A RICH
COUNTRY, IT IS NOT PARTICULARLY
A MILITARY POWERFUL COUNTRY.
IT SERVES, I THINK, EVERYONE'S
PURPOSE TO HAVE THIS GOVERNMENT
SAY WELL, WE HAVE A COUNTER-
EXTREMISM SOLUTION.
AND WE HAVE A MODEL TO EXPORT.
THIS IS PART AND PARCEL OF
MOOCCARN DIPLOMACY.
>> Reporter: AND HE QUESTIONS
HOW EFFECTIVE THESE PROGRAMS,
EVEN THE MOURCHIDAT, TRULY ARE,
GIVEN THE HIGH LEVEL OF ISLAMIC
STATE RECRUITMENT.
>> WOULD IT BE A LOT MORE IF
THERE HADN'T BEEN THESE
PROGRAMS?
IT'S A VERY HARD THING TO
MEASURE, I THINK.
IT'S ALSO NOT CLEAR REALLY THE
EXTENT TO WHICH THAT KIND OFSE T
POPULAR IN THOSE MOST
PROBLEMATIC AREAS WHERE YOU FIND
AT LEAST A TENDENCY TOWARDS
EXTREMISM.
AND I THINK THAT'S ESPECIALLY
THE URBAN PERIPHERIES.
>> Reporter: BUT BACK AT THE
MOURCHIDAT SCHOOL, THERE IS FIRM
BELIEF AMONG CURRENT STUDENTS
THAT THEIR MISSION IS URGENT.
THAT THEIR MISSION IS URGENT. >>
(translated): THIS
TRAINING
>> (translated): THIS
TRAINING DOESN'T JUST SERVE MY
NATION, IT
DOESN'T JUST SERVE MY NATION, IT
HAS INTERNATIONAL IMPORTANCE.
THE WEST HAS A BAD IMAGE OF
ISLAM, AND WE HAVE A ROLE IN
CHANGING THAT.
I SWEAR I AM LOSING SLEEP WHEN I
HEAR OUR PROFESSORS SAY WE ARE
THE GUARDIANS OF THE RELIGION!
>> Reporter: THESE 100 ELITE
WOMEN WILL GRADUATE IN DECEMBER
AND FAN OUT ACROSS THE COUNTRY,
PERHAPS HUNDREDS OF MILES FROM
THEIR FAMILIES.
THEY SAY THEY ARE UP TO THE
CHALLENGE THAT AWAITS THEM.
FOR PBS NEWSHO, THURIS IS KIRA
KAY, IN RABAT MOROCCO.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, HOW MIGHT AN EXPECTANT
MOTHER'S ZIP CODE AFFECT HER
CHILD'S FUTURE?
ECONOMIST JOHN KOMLOS HAS ARGUED
INCOME INEQUALITY BEGINS AT
BIRTH.
TODAY HE EXPANDS ON HIS THEORY,
SAYING IT ACTUALLY BEGINS IN THE
WOMB.
YOU CAN READ HIS LATEST ESSAY
ON OUR HOME PAGE,
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: TUNE IN THIS
EVENING, TONIGHT ON THE PBS
SERIES "NATURE," "THE SAGEBRUSH
SEA," AN ECOSYSTEM THAT COVERS
PARTS OF ELEVEN WESTERN STATES
WHERE OIL AND GAS DRILLING
ARE COLLIDING WITH EFFORTS TO
SAVE THE SAGE GROUSE.
THE U.S. FISH & WILDLIFE SERVICE
MUST DECIDE BY SEPTEMBER
WHETHER THE RARE BIRD
SHOULD BE PROTECTED UNDER THE
ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT.
THAT'S TONIGHT ON MOST PBS
STATIONS.
AND ON CHARLIE ROSE, GEORGE
CLOONEY TALKS MOVIES AND LIFE.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, FROM FISH TO NUTS.
AN ECONOMIC LOOK AT CALIFORNIA'S
HISTORIC DROUGHT.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.